[IMP] accounting: batch payments and SEPA overhaul (+ additional CH loca info) (#17751)
odoo/documentation: content/applications/finance/accounting/payments/sepa_payments.rst

=============
SEPA payments
=============

:abbr:`SEPA (Single Euro Payments Area)` is a payment integration initiative of the European Union

> that facilitates standardized, simplified electronic payments in **EUR currency** across SEPA

Reviewer: ```suggestion
that facilitates standardized, simplified electronic payments in **euro** across SEPA
```
Maybe it just me, but it doesn't read well

countries.

With :ref:`SEPA Direct Debit (SDD) <accounting/sepa_payments/sdd>`, customers sign a mandate that
authorizes you to collect future payments from their bank accounts. This is particularly useful for

> recurring :doc:`subscription </applications/sales/subscriptions>` payments. You can keep records of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
recurring :doc:`subscription <../../../sales/subscriptions>` payments. You can keep records of
```
We try to use [relative links](https://www.odoo.com/documentation/master/contributing/documentation/rst_guidelines.html#relative-links) whenever possible :)

these mandates in Odoo and :ref:`generate XML files <accounting/sepa_payments/XML>` indicating to
the bank which payments to collect from customers.

> Unlike :abbr:`SDD (SEPA Direct Debit)`, :ref:`SCT (SEPA Credit Transfer)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Unlike :abbr:`SDD (SEPA Direct Debit)`, :ref:`SEPA Credit Transfer (SCT)
```
Since you spelled out "SEPA Direct Debit (SDD)" the first time you mentioned it, I would do the same for SEPA Credit Transfer

<accounting/sepa_payments/sct>` is an outgoing payment method where you "push" funds to a recipient.
It is the standard for handling vendor bills, employee salaries, and one-off transfers. These
payments can also be grouped into a :ref:`single XML file <accounting/sepa_payments/XML>` to upload
to your bank.

.. note::
   - `List of all SEPA countries
     <https://www.europeanpaymentscouncil.eu/document-library/other/epc-list-sepa-scheme-countries>`_.

>    - According to the localization package installed, the **SEPA Direct Debit** and **SEPA Credit

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - Depending on the localization package installed, the **SEPA Direct Debit** and **SEPA Credit
```

     Transfer** modules may be installed by default. If not, they need to be
     :ref:`installed <general/install>`.

.. important::
   - SDD and SCT payment methods are **exclusively valid for transactions in EUR currency**. If your
     company is located in the :abbr:`EFTA (European Free Trade Assocation)` region, a
     :abbr:`non-EEA (non-European Economic Area)` SEPA country, or a :abbr:`non-EEA (non-European
     Economic Area)` SEPA territory, consult the :ref:`ISO20022 <accounting/sepa_payments/iso20022>`

>      section.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   SDD and SCT payment methods are **only valid for transactions in EUR**. If your
   company is located in the :abbr:`EFTA (European Free Trade Assocation)` region, a
   :abbr:`non-EEA (non-European Economic Area)` SEPA country, or a :abbr:`non-EEA (non-European
   Economic Area)` SEPA territory, consult the :ref:`ISO20022 <accounting/sepa_payments/iso20022>`
   section.
```
No need for the bullet point :)

.. seealso::

>    - :doc:`customer_vendor_bank_accounts`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   :doc:`customer_vendor_bank_accounts`
```

.. _accounting/sepa_payments/sdd:

SEPA Direct Debit
=================

.. _accounting/sepa_payments/sdd_configuration:

Configuration
-------------

Creditor identifier

> ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
Not necessary IMO

To enable SDD for customer payments, go to :menuselection:`Accounting --> Configuration -->
Settings`, scroll to the :guilabel:`Customer Payments` section, enable :guilabel:`SEPA Direct Debit
(SDD)`, and click :guilabel:`Save`. Then, scroll to the :guilabel:`Customer Payments` section again,
set the company's :guilabel:`Creditor Identifier`, and click :guilabel:`Save`.

.. tip::
   The creditor identifier is provided by your bank or the authority responsible for delivering

>    them in your country. For testing purposes, you can use the test creditor identifier

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   it in your country. For testing purposes, you can use the test creditor identifier
```

   `DE98ZZZ09999999999`.

.. _accounting/sepa_payments/sdd_mandates:

Mandates
--------

An SDD mandate is a legal document authorizing a company to debit funds from a customer's bank
account. It includes key information, such as the customer's name and IBAN, the mandate's start and
end date, and the mandate's unique identifier. The mandate form must be filled in and signed by the
customer.

Creating mandates
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

#. In the **Accounting** app, go to :menuselection:`Customers --> Direct Debit Mandates`.

> #. Click :guilabel:`New` and fill out the fields.

Reviewer: You are giving information about the fields on lines 81/82, 87/88, 101/102. I think you could add that info to your numbered list at a sub-level with bullets.

```rst
#. Fill out:

   - :guilabel:`Account Number`: a valid IBAN must be defined (...)
   - :guilabel:`SDD Scheme`: select :guilabel:`CORE` (...)
   - :guilabel:`End Date`: select a date after which the mandate is closed automatically. If this field is left empty, (...)
```

#. Click :guilabel:`Print` to generate a PDF of the mandate form, then send it to the customer for
   signature.
#. Click :guilabel:`Validate` to activate the mandate.

.. important::
   A valid IBAN must be defined in the :guilabel:`Account Number` field of the :doc:`bank journal
   <../bank>` used to receive SDD payments for the mandate.

.. tip::
   - To print the mandate form after the mandate has been validated, click the :icon:`fa-cog`
     (:guilabel:`gear`) icon, then select :guilabel:`Mandate form`.
   - The :guilabel:`SDD Scheme` depends on the type of customer: Select :guilabel:`CORE` for B2C

>      customers and :guilabel:`B2B` for B2B customers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - The :guilabel:`SDD Scheme` depends on the type of customer. Select :guilabel:`CORE` for B2C
     customers and :guilabel:`B2B` for B2B customers.
```
Could be worth adding that info as well? Assuming it's correct :)
<img width="453" height="121" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/4fc822f7-d896-40d6-bb3f-6b0b7bd8b094" />

   - SDD mandates are created automatically for :doc:`online payments made with SDD
     <../../payment_providers/sdd>`.

Once an SDD mandate is active, subsequent SDD payments can be generated via Odoo and :ref:`uploaded
to your online banking interface <accounting/sepa_payments/XML>`. Customers with an active SDD
mandate can also use this payment method for :doc:`online purchases <../../payment_providers/sdd>`.

.. _accounting/sepa_payments/close-revoke-mandate:

Closing or revoking a mandate
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

SDD mandates are closed automatically after their :guilabel:`End Date`. If this field is left empty,
the mandate remains active until it is closed or revoked. To close or revoke a mandate, go to
:menuselection:`Accounting --> Customers --> Direct Debit Mandates`, select the relevant mandate,
and click :guilabel:`Close` or :guilabel:`Revoke`.

**Closing** a mandate updates the mandate's end day to the current day. Invoices issued after the
present day will not be processed with an SDD payment. **Revoking** a mandate disables the mandate

> immediately. No SDD payment can be registered anymore, regardless of the invoice's date. However,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
present day will not be processed with an SDD payment. **Revoking** a mandate
immediately disables it. No SDD payment can be registered anymore, regardless of the invoice's date. However,
```

.. _accounting/sepa_payments/XML:

Processing SDD payments
-----------------------

All registered SDD payments can be processed at once by uploading an XML file containing a batch of
all posted SDD payments to your online banking interface. To do so, follow these steps:

#. :ref:`Create a batch payment <accounting/batch/creation>` and include the SDD payments to
   collect.

   .. tip::
      You can filter payments by SDD scheme using the :guilabel:`SDD CORE` and :guilabel:`SDD B2B`
      filters.

#. :guilabel:`Validate` the batch payment. The XML file is generated automatically and available
   for download in the chatter.
#. Download the XML file and upload it to your online banking interface to process the payments.
#. Once the SDD batch payment has been received, :doc:`reconcile the transaction
   <../bank/reconciliation>` with the batch payment to mark the related invoices as
   :guilabel:`Paid`.

.. tip::
   To view the payments and invoices linked to a specific SDD mandate, click the
   :guilabel:`Collections` and :guilabel:`Invoices Paid` smart button on the :ref:`Direct Debit
   Mandate <accounting/sepa_payments/sdd>` form.

.. note::

>    The files generated by Odoo follow the SDD **PAIN.008.001.02** specifications, as required by the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   The files generated by Odoo comply with the SDD **PAIN.008.001.02** specifications, as required by the
```

   SEPA customer-to-bank `implementation guidelines <https://www.europeanpaymentscouncil.eu/document-library/implementation-guidelines/sepa-credit-transfer-customer-psp-implementation>`_,

>    which ensures compatibility with the banks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   which ensures compatibility with banks.
```

.. seealso::
   - :doc:`batch`
   - :doc:`SEPA Direct Debit for online payments <../../payment_providers/sdd>`
   - `SEPA guidelines

>      <https://www.europeanpaymentscouncil.eu/document-library/implementation-guidelines/sepa-credit-transfer-inter-psp-implementation-guidelines>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
Since it's already linked just above, I wouldn't include it here again.

SDD rejections
--------------

SDD rejections can occur for several reasons, the most common being insufficient funds in the

> customer's account. With SDD the recipient's account is credited before the funds are actually

Reviewer: ```suggestion
customer's account. With SDD, the recipient's account is credited before the funds are actually
```

the reversal of the journal entry with the transaction for the SDD rejection. To do so, follow these
steps:

#. Access the invoice linked to the rejected SDD payment.
#. Click the :icon:`fa-info-circle` :guilabel:`(information)` icon in the footer of the
   :guilabel:`Invoice Lines` tab, then click :guilabel:`View` to access the payment associated with
   the invoice.
#. Click the :guilabel:`Journal entry` smart button to access the related journal entry.
#. Click :guilabel:`Reverse entry`, optionally edit the fields in the popup, then click
   :guilabel:`Reverse`. A reversal entry is created with a :guilabel:`Reference` mentioning the
   initial journal entry. As a result, the invoice is marked as :guilabel:`Not paid`.
#. :ref:`Access the bank journal's reconciliation view <accounting/reconciliation/access>` and
   :ref:`reconcile <accounting/reconciliation/reconcile>` the transaction created for the
   SDD rejection with the reversal of the entry related to the payment.

.. _accounting/sepa_payments/sct:

SEPA Credit Transfer
====================

.. _accounting/sepa_payments/sct_configuration:

Configuration
-------------

Activate SCT

> ~~~~~~~~~~~~

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
Not necessary

To pay suppliers with SCT, you must activate the **SEPA Credit Transfer** setting. To do so, go to
:menuselection:`Accounting --> Configuration --> Settings --> Vendor Payments: SEPA Credit Transfer
(SCT)`. By activating the setting and filling out your company data, you will be able to use the SCT

> option when paying your vendor.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To pay suppliers with SCT, go to
:menuselection:`Accounting --> Configuration --> Settings`. Under :guilabel:`Vendor Payments`, activate :guilabel:`SEPA Credit Transfer (SCT)`. Next, fill out your company data.
```
Could be clearer/simpler.
Do you have more info about these company fields? They were automatically filled out here (except for Issuer), but it's unclear what one needs to do, if anything.

<img width="327" height="152" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/60bb871e-d1ce-4f14-8f94-a985ac1ac978" />

After activating SEPA, go to :menuselection:`Configuration --> Journals` and open your
:guilabel:`Bank` journal. Under :guilabel:`Outgoing Payments`, add :guilabel:`SEPA Credit Transfer`
as a :guilabel:`Payment Method` if it's not there. This allows Odoo to use this bank account to
generate XML payment files.

Registering payments
--------------------

To register vendor payments made with SCT, first verify that an :guilabel:`Account Number` and
:guilabel:`Bank` are indicated on the vendor's :doc:`contact form <../../../essentials/contacts>`,
under the :guilabel:`Accounting` tab. Odoo automatically verifies if the IBAN format is respected.

Then, go to :menuselection:`Vendors --> Payments`, and click :guilabel:`New`. When creating your
payment, select :guilabel:`SEPA Credit Transfer` as the :guilabel:`Payment Method`. The
:guilabel:`Vendor Bank Account` is automatically populated based on the :guilabel:`Vendor` selected.

> For future payments to this vendor, Odoo will automatically suggest you the bank account, but it

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For future payments to this vendor, Odoo will automatically suggest the bank account, but it
```

remains possible to select a new one from the dropdown menu by clicking the :guilabel:`Vendor Bank
Account` field.

Once your payment is registered, do not forget to confirm it. You can also pay vendor bills from the
bill directly using the :guilabel:`Register Payment` button at the top of a vendor bill. The form is
the same, but the payment is directly linked to the bill and will be automatically reconciled with
it.

.. _accounting/sepa_payments/iso20022:

ISO 20022
=========

ISO 20022 is a global standard for the exchange of payment data between banks. It uses a format that
lets payment details and related documents move together as a single package. This means information
such as invoice numbers, tax details, and who sent the payment is stored in fields that computers
can automatically read. Unlike SEPA, the ISO 20022 standard can be used with any currency worldwide.

In Odoo, the SEPA Payments module acts as the underlying engine for all ISO 20022 transactions (both

> domestic SEPA payments in Euros and non-Euro global transfers are supported by the module).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
domestic SEPA payments in euros and non-euro global transfers are supported by the module).
```

:doc:`Some countries and regions <sepa_payments>` may use a localized, country-specific version of

> ISO 20022 which requires additional configuration. In these cases, we strongly recommend reading the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ISO 20022, which requires additional configuration. In these cases, we strongly recommend reading the
```

:ref:`PAIN version <accounting/sepa_payments/pain>` section of this page.

.. _accounting/sepa_payments/pain:

PAIN version
============

.. note::
   - :abbr:`PAIN (PAyment INitiation)` is the specific message protocol within ISO 20022 used to
     send transfer instructions from Odoo to your bank.
   - To enable a country-specific PAIN version, first check that you have the :doc:`fiscal
     localization <../../../finance/fiscal_localizations>` for your country installed in your
     database.

.. important::

>    - ISO 20022 **PAIN.001.001.03** is being deprecated in November, 2026. Make sure to use the newer

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - ISO 20022 **PAIN.001.001.03** is being deprecated in November 2026. Make sure to use the newer
```

     **PAIN.001.001.09** version or the one required in your country.

To select a specific PAIN version, open the **Accounting** app, go to :menuselection:`Configuration

> --> Journals`, and open your :guilabel:`Bank` journal. Click the :guilabel:`Outgoing` payments tab,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
--> Journals`, and open your :guilabel:`Bank` journal. Click the :guilabel:`Outgoing Payments` tab,
```
